Writable DOM and dynamic support for 6.0 (#163)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2020/serializer/WriteableDomAndDynamic.md

This document proposes a new API based on learning and scenarios from:
- The writable DOM prototype.
  - During 5.0, there was a [writable DOM effort](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/30436). Unlike `JsonDocument`, the design centered around writable aspects, usability and LINQ support, and not performance and allocations. It was shelved due to time constraints and outstanding work.
- The dynamic support code example.
  - During 5.0, [dynamic support](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/29690) was not able to be implemented due to schedule constraints. Instead, a [code example](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/42097) was provided that enables `dynamic` and a writeable DOM that can be used by any 3.0+ runtime in order to unblock the community and gather feedback for a 6.0 feature.
- Azure prototyping.

>   - The Azure team needs a writable DOM, and supporting `dynamic` is important for some scenarios but not all. A [prototype](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/azure.core.dynamicjson?view=azure-dotnet-preview) has been created. Work is also being coordinated with the C# team to support Intellisense with `dynamic`, although that is not expected to be implemented in time to be used in 6.0.

Reviewer: > Work is also being coordinated with the C# team to support Intellisense with `dynamic`, although that is not expected to be implemented in time to be used in 6.0.

Issue link in dotnet/roslyn or dotnet/csharplang?

Author: @KrzysztofCwalina @MadsTorgersen is there a link based on our discussion from a few days ago?

I see https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/issues/24226 but not sure if that is the one being used to track the discussion around supporting intellisense through defining "roles" which can be linked to a known schema where the members are known but not necessarily the Type names.

# Dynamic
The dynamic feature in C# is enabled by both language features and implementation in the `System.Linq.Expressions` assembly. The core interface detected by the language to enable this support is [IDynamicMetaObjectProvider](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.dynamic.idynamicmetaobjectprovider?view=net-5.0).

There are implementations of `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` including [DynamicObject](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.dynamic.dynamicobject?view=net-5.0) and [ExpandObject](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.dynamic.expandoobject?view=netcore-3.1). However, both implementations are not ideal:
- There are many public members used for wiring up dynamic support, but are of little to no value for consumers so they would be confusing when mixed in with other methods intended to be used for writable DOM support.

> - It is not possible to efficiently combine writable DOM classes that are not tied to `dynamic` and `System.Linq.Expressions`:

Reviewer 2: The assumes the current implementation of dynamic. What would it take to change the implementation of dynamic to allow this combining to be done efficiently?

Author: The goal is to avoid the dependency to SLE.dll for cases that don't actually use `dynamic` at run-time.

Today, even if `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` is placed into a new small assembly, the one member the interface has expands into many more types in SLE.dll:
```cs
System.Dynamic.DynamicMetaObject GetMetaObject (System.Linq.Expressions.Expression parameter)
```

One approach is to add a new `IDynamicMetaObjectProviderEx` interface in a small assembly (probably with little to no code) and where the equivalent of `GetMetaObject` only returns types from that same small assembly.

Another approach, which may not be feasible, is to expand the linker in some way to handle this.

cc @MadsTorgersen

Reviewer 2: > The goal is to avoid the dependency to SLE.dll for cases that don't actually use dynamic at run-time.

I agree with this.

> Today, even if IDynamicMetaObjectProvider is placed into a new small assembly,

This is just one of the design options. For example, an interesting option may be to introduce a new light-weight interface in System.Runtime that supports dynamic scenarios like this one.

>   - If combined, there would need to be an assembly reference to the very large `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` event when `dynamic` features are not needed.

Reviewer 3: Can the linker be updated to be able to handle the case where `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` implementation is never used as dynamic and trim the reference to `System.Linq.Expressions`?

Author: The dynamic support is only enabled by the serializer by calling the new `options.EnableDynamicTypes()` method, so we have a root method that the linker would be able to understand and trim appropriately. That root method adds the custom converter that references `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider`.

If EnableDynamicTypes is not called, and the dynamic keyword is used, there will be a run-time error during deserialization.

Also, as explained elsewhere, the writable DOM can be used without dynamic and without referencing SLE.dll.

  - If separate, the `dynamic` classes delegate to separate writable DOM classes, which doubles the object instances and increases the concept count around interop between the types returned from `dynamic` vs. the writable DOM classes.
- `ExpandoObject` does not support case insensitivity and throws an exception when accessing missing properties (a `null` is desired instead).
- `DynamicObject` prevents potential optimizations including property-lookup.

Thus, the design presented here for `dynamic` assumes:
- Implementation of `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider`.
- Use of the writable DOM without requiring a reference to `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` (when `dynamic` support is not desired).
- Efficient implementation of tying both `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` and the writable DOM classes into a single instance. Newtonsoft also has a single object model with [JToken](https://www.newtonsoft.com/json/help/html/T_Newtonsoft_Json_Linq_JToken.htm) which implements `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider`.

> ## Adding a System.Text.Json.Dynamic.dll (STJD) assembly

Reviewer 3: I understand that there might be technical limitations that we won't be able to overcome but can we start with the best-case scenario where dynamic support doesn't require additional dependency/configuration code and see if we can achieve it?

Author: Perhaps. This is also a problem we have today for other assembly references in STJ that we don't have a solution for today. Consider:
- STJ has a reference to SLE because of the new `System.Object` converter's implementation of `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider`.
- To function properly, at run-time that converter must be added before (de)serialization occurs, so the reference to SLE is there normally.
- To allow the linker to remove the reference to SLE, the converter shouldn't be registered\added by default, thus an "opt-in" so the linker can walk dependencies.
- The linker then would also need to consider applications (e.g. stand-alone and Blazor) which it doesn't do today (it only considers framework assemblies) and would need to change STJ based on the application and whether the opt-in was called.
  - The linker would remove the opt-in method since it is not called.
  - Then the linker would remove the custom converter since the opt-in method is no longer there.
  - Then the linker would remove the reference to SLE since it is no longer needed.

@eerhardt are aware of plans in 6.0 to support application-to-framework dependencies and "assembly reference removal" like above? Is it feasible?

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I fully understand the question. But even in 5.0:

* If System.Text.Json exposes a method that is never invoked by the app, the ILLinker will trim the method.
* If no methods/types in an assembly are used (i.e. SLE), the the ILLinker will remove the whole assembly and all references to it.

Author: Thanks @eerhardt I changed the doc to assume ILLinker instead of a separate assembly. I was unable to prototype however due to missing 6.0 packages at this time.

Having `System.Text.Json.dll` directly reference `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` is not desired:

> - Implementations of Blazor and stand-alone apps that do not use `dynamic` features do not want to carry the large `System.Linq.Expressions.dll`.

Author: Yes that is the goal.

  - Referencing `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` will require ~5.5MB of disk size. `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` is around 5MB in size but since it also references to `System.Linq` (~400K) and `System.ObjectModel` (~80K) (which that are not referenced by STJ) it becomes ~5.5MB (crossgen'd size).

>   - STJ is considering removing its reference to using reflection emit, so referencing `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` would also require keeping the references to the various System.Reflection.* assemblies. However, since these are currently implemented in the runtime, it is not a factor today for disk size.

Reviewer: > However, since these are currently implemented in the runtime, it is not a factor today for disk size.

Can you elaborate on this?  The core logic behind reflection / reflection emit is in the runtime, but there's plenty of surface area in managed code exposing all that functionality.  Is that surface area inconsequential?

Reviewer 2: Also, we should assume that we will be able trim these one way or the other in future.

Author: > Can you elaborate on this? The core logic behind reflection / reflection emit is in the runtime, but there's plenty of surface area in managed code exposing all that functionality. Is that surface area inconsequential?

Thanks yes I'll re-word that. The surface area is only ~30K, but good to point out.

> - STJ is somewhat being pushed downstack with usage by other framework assemblies including the recent "BinaryData" work, so basic questions around the assembly dependency tree and potential cycles come into play.

Reviewer: > STJ is somewhat being pushed downstack with usage by other framework assemblies including the recent "BinaryData" work

BinaryData is a high-level type.  It is not being included in netcoreapp.  It should have zero impact on layering within netcoreapp.  If it does, we need to revisit BinaryData.

Author: I'll re-word that as being a possibility.

Thus the proposal is to add a `System.Text.Json.Dynamic.dll` assembly that will have a reference to both `System.Text.Json.dll` and `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` and contain the implementation supporting `dynamic`.

> An alternative which may or may not be feasible in the 6.0 timeframe is to extend the linker to remove dependencies on applications such as Blazor or a stand-alone app if the `dynamic` feature is not used. Currently the linker is only ran against framework assemblies, not application assemblies. This will help the stand-alone scenario and perhaps Blazor, but not the downstack concerns.

Author: As noted elsewhere the design was updated to now have the extra STJD assembly -- the ILLinker should be able to remove the SLE reference if dynamic is not used.

_For naming, also consider `S.T.J.DynamicSerialization.dll`._

A more open-ended name of `S.T.J.Extensions.dll` was considered but is not discoverable, so a more feature-specific name was considered a better choice. By going with feature-specific names like `S.T.J.Dynamic.dll`, we may end up with additional assemblies in the future. If the need arises, these extension assemblies could forward to private common implementation assembly(s).

## Proposed API to enable dynamic mode
In the new STJD assembly:
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
{
    public static class JsonExtensions
    {
        public static void EnableDynamic(JsonSerializerOptions this options);
    }
}
```

Thus a consumer would reference STJD.dll and then author code such as:
```cs
    var options = new JsonSerializerOptions();

>     options.EnableDynamicTypes();

Reviewer 2: What is going to be the default for ASP.NET ? Is ASP.NET going to enable the dynamic by default (and thus be fat out of the box), or not and be inconvenient to use out of the box? It is a very hard choice to make.

Author: IMO it should be opt-in since:
- It is faster, uses less private bytes and should have faster startup.
  - A rough benchmark shows that dynamic is ~2.6x slower when deserializing + serializing a smallish POCO with a few properties including a collection and nested object.
- Non-breaking: backwards compat for deserializing `System.Object` types as `JsonElement`.
- It is easy to opt-in.
- nit: if dynamic is enabled by default it is not easy to opt-out: you'd have to remove the custom converter from `options.Converters` although we could add a helper for that.

However, if it is common or useful enough (including compat with Newtonsoft) then opt-in could be considered. @pranavkm thoughts on how common the C# `dynamic` usage is?

Reviewer 5: From the code I've encountered, it's far more common to see the use of `JObject` in application code over the use of `dynamic` both to read and build a DOM. I would have expected that having a editable DOM that's available by default would be something we would want to enable.

A few points against enabling `dynamic` by default:

* Globally changing JSON defaults in ASP.NET Core is fairly easy. We have documented how to enable or opt-out of defaults and users haven't had too many complaints.
* Generally any kind of opaque type (dynamic / JObject / JsonNode) makes it harder to document an API. For 6.0, one of our themes is to make APIs more descriptive, so encouraging this pattern is counter to goals. That said, I doubt there's a big overlap of users that use `dynamic` in their APIs and also have Swagger enabled.
* Undoing this option is apparently more tedious than enabling it. It would follow we make the easier choice and not enable it by default.

However the volume of support for the [issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/29690) makes me want to second guess myself. I'm just surprised how popular it is and I don't think I have enough data to unilaterally make a decision here. I'll follow up with @bradygaster to get you a decision. It's great we're having this discussion early, we have ample time to get the right defaults before 6.0 ships.

Reviewer 6: I'm not a big fan of the dynamic support in Newtonsoft.Json. People want it to work in such a way that they just use .NET primitive types and everything just works. The reality is the fact you're using JValue/JObject/JArray leaks out.

Author: > I'm not a big fan of the dynamic support in Newtonsoft.Json. People want it to work in such a way that they just use .NET primitive types and everything just works.

Can you elaborate a bit? Both Newtonsoft and the design here support .NET primitive types when in "edit mode" meaning after deserialization or for a new object, the user can assign a raw integer, List, string, standard POCO type, etc. to a property on a dynamic object (or add an element to dynamic array) and that gets serialized that as expected. 

> The reality is the fact you're using JValue/JObject/JArray leaks out.

During deserialization, we need a type that implements `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` thus we need to create JsonValue,JsonObject,JsonArray (or equivalent) on deserialization. Are you suggesting that the type implementing `IDynamicMetaObjectProvider` has no additional functionality or an internal implementation instead of JsonValue etc?

internal class JsonDynamicArray : JsonArray, IDynamicMetaObjectProvider {}
internal class JsonDynamicValue : JsonValue, IDynamicMetaObjectProvider {}
```

where `JsonObject`, `JsonArray`, and `JsonValue` are new public types in STJ.dll.

### Varying the `T` in `Deserialize<T>`
This
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<dynamic>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```
is equivalent to
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<object>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```
and these (assuming `options.EnableDynamicTypes()` was called)
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonNode>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonObject>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```

### Supporting non-dynamic to dynamic
If a previously created non-dynamic `JsonNode` object needs dynamic support, an extension could be provided:
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
{
    public static class JsonExtensions
    {
        public static dynamic ToDynamic(JsonNode this value);
    }
}
```

Called like this:
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // a non-dynamic JsonNode
    dynamic obj = node.ToDynamic();
```

> The implementation of `ToDynamic()` is somewhat slow since it does a deep clone. It would be similar to the code below except a bit faster since some overhead of the serialize\deserialize methods may be avoided:

Reviewer 3: >The implementation of `ToDynamic()` is somewhat slow since it does a deep clone.

Does it have to do a deep clone?

Author: The current design has the dynamic type deriving from a non-dynamic base class. The base class contains the state.

When `ToDynamic` is called it must do a clone of some sort:
- If a shallow clone, the dynamic instance returned would also mutate the original non-dynamic instance. Plus the state itself would need to be kept in a helper class which complicates things a bit and would need to be public since the dynamic class is currently in a different assembly (pending possible linker work in 6.0).
- If a deep clone there are no issues with shared mutability and possible side-effects from that. (yes it's slow).

I don't anticipate `ToDynamic()` being a common scenario, however.

During serialization, the DOM is written using the serializer and uses any custom converters that may be configured. In all but idiocentric scenarios (e.g. a custom converter can do anything), the behavior is natural and JSON is round-tripped as expected.

In the example, a JSON "NaN" string is deserialized into a `JsonValue` and when `GetValue<double>` is called, a `double` is returned, assuming the appropriate `JsonSerializerOptions` are configured for quoted numbers. When the node is serialized, it produces a JSON string (again, if configured). The consumer of the DOM is not necessarily aware that `double` values assigned to the node may be serialized to JSON as either a string or a JSON number, and after deserialization is not aware what the internal state is - it could be a `byte[]`, a `JsonElement` or a `string` depending on implementation and\or the JSON token (string or number).

## Primary API
These types live in STJ.dll.
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
// Also consider existing S.T.J.Serialization namespace instead of S.T.J.
// since it is now coupled to the serializer rather than stand-alone.
{

>     public abstract class JsonNode

Reviewer 3: Do we need the type hierarchy? 
Can we have a single JsonNode type that has and `int` and `string` based indexers for object and array cases?

Author: What would the advantages be? It seems like having indexers that throw (an array won't support string indexer) would be more confusing and less type-safe.

Reviewer 3: Not having to cast when navigating:

```C#
node["prop"][1].GetInt32()

vs 

((JsonValue)((JsonArray)((JsonObject)node)["prop"])[1]).GetInt32();

```

Reviewer 6: +1

All these samples focus on creating JSON. People want to query and update.

Compare querying JSON with Newtonsoft.Json with what you have proposed here.

Author: > Not having to cast when navigating

Sure that makes sense when not using dynamic anyway. When using dynamic it will just work.

    {
        public JsonNode(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        public JsonSerializerOptions Options { get; }

        // Return the internal value or convert to T as necessary.
        public abstract T GetValue<T>();

        // The token type from deserialization; otherwise JsonValueKind.Unspecified.
        public JsonValueKind ValueKind { get; }
    }

>     public sealed class JsonArray : JsonNode, IList<object>

Reviewer 3: `IList<object>`?

Why not `IList<JsonNode>`

Author: See https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/163/files#diff-34fc37119c1d4491b844207aeed3a9c846c3e2d835fd712e164b1e47b89687c0R358

Reviewer 6: You could get around this by making `JsonNode` have implicit constructors to convert from primitive values to `JsonNode`.

Author: Using `object` allows any serializable CLR type to be added to the collection.

A previous prototype did use operators, but for various reasons explained in the doc, we are now trying to avoid implicit (or explicit) operators.

Author: The doc does mention some reasons why implicit operators are not used (not supported in all languages, consistency for types that we don't know, not needed when using dynamic).

Reviewer 7: > You could get around this by making `JsonNode` have implicit constructors to convert from primitive values to `JsonNode`.

This is how the initial prototype solved the issue, but kept `JsonArray` and `IList<JsonNode>`:
https://github.com/ahsonkhan/corefx/blob/5bc2806f33090e78b38fafe4d5b46d5a0a4c1f08/src/System.Text.Json/ref/System.Text.Json.cs#L240-L259

> not supported in all languages

Does that mean we shouldn't have any implicit operators in the framework?

> consistency for types that we don't know

What do you mean by this?

Author: > Does that mean we shouldn't have any implicit operators in the framework?

For serialization, yes IMHO. Partly because it results in an inconsistent programming model (see below; also applies to explicit operators) but also because an implicit operator should not throw and it should be a simple, lossless, fast conversion which doesn't hold for serialization.

>> consistency for types that we don't know

> What do you mean by this?

We can only add operators to known types such as `string` etc. We can't add operators to custom types (e.g. a third party `Currency` struct or a `DateTimeOffset` custom converter). So by not supporting operators we level the "known" types along with the "unknown" types and thus have a consistent programming model across both.

    {
        public JsonArray(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);
        public JsonArray(JsonElement value, JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        // Can be used to return:
        // - Any compatible collection type
        // - JsonElement
        // - string or byte[] (as JSON)
        public override T GetValue<T>();
    }

>     public sealed class JsonObject : JsonNode, IDictionary<string, object>

Reviewer 3: Why not ` IDictionary<string, JsonNode>`

Author: Currently the prototype has `IDictionary<string, JsonNode>`; I'll update the API doc to match.

The original thinking was that someone may want to do this:
```cs
JsonObject jObject = ...
jObject["MyString"] = "hello"; // "hello" is a raw string, not a JsonObject (and no implicit cast from string->JsonObject)
```
and if we have `IDictionary<string, JsonNode>` then you'd have to do this:
```cs
JsonObject jObject = ...
jObject["MyString"] = new JsonValue("hello");
```

Since then, however, indexers were added to `JsonNode` that must return `JsonNode`, not object, in order to get the chaining of arrays and properties so it makes sense to use `IDictionary<string, JsonNode>` and `IList<JsonNode>` for arrays.

- The existing serializer methods can be used which support UTF8, string, Utf8JsonReader\Writer and Stream. Any future overloads will just work.
- Serializer-specific functionality including custom converters and quoted numbers just work.

The `JsonSerializerOptions` is passed to `JsonNode` and used to specify any run-time added custom converters, handle other options such as quoted numbers, and to respect the `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive` to determine whether the string-based lookup of property names on `JsonObject` are case-sensitive (for both direct use of `JsonObject` and also indirect use through `dynamic`). If we have `static JsonValue Parse()` methods, those would also need an override to specify the `JsonSerializerOptions`.

Although the serializer can be used to directly (de)serialize `JsonNode` types, once a `JsonNode` instance is created, it is expected the `JsonNode.GetValue<T>()` method is used to change types instead of using the serializer:
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // any value
    string str;

    // This works, but has no caching:

>     byte[] utf8 = JsonSerializer.SerializeToUtf8Bytes(node, options);

Reviewer 3: I would've had a hard time figuring out that to write out the JsonNode I need to use the serializer.

Serializer feels more like a thing for customer-provider types and not something that already represents JSON.

Author: The design, like Newtonsoft's, allows any CLR type to be used in "edit mode". Thus the shape of the JSON is not always known.

Author: "Serialize()" instance methods were added to JsonNode to make this easier (don't need to pass in `options`) and more discoverable. The existing JsonSerializer.Serialize() methods can still be used however.

However, no "Deserialize()" static methods were added -- the existing JsonSerializer.Deserialize() methods should be used. Note that since a JsonNode can also be a property type or element type of an existing POCO\collection, in many cases no Serialize\Deserialize methods are necessary.

Reviewer 7: > Serializer feels more like a thing for customer-provider types and not something that already represents JSON.

I agree. Why not just `ToJsonString()`?

Author: > I agree. Why not just ToJsonString()?

I'm open here. I recently added static Parse() methods and instance-based "To()" methods. However, since they are all "optional" they are in a second-class priority in a way.

    str = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<string>(utf8, options);

    // For ease-of-use and performance, use GetValue().
    // It may return the raw internal value or the last converted value instead of deserializing.
    str = node.GetValue<string>();
```

### Cast operators
No explicit or implicit cast operators exist since `GetValue<T>` allows for a single, consistent programming model. This also works on not just the "known" types in the CLR but also custom data types known by the serializer.

Cast operators do not work in all languages such as F# and even for C# would not work nicely since `System.Object` is allowed for `JsonArray` and `JsonCollection` elements. For example:
```cs
JsonArray jArray = ...
jArray[2] = "hello";
// Is jArray[2] a string or a JsonValue?

jArray[2] = 2;
// jArray[2] is always an int since we can't have implicit cast operators for number types.
```

> Although it is possible to add cast operators for `JsonValue` to\from string\bool, number types should not have any implicit operator since they may throw - for example, an internal value of "3.14" cannot be converted into `int` so an exception must be thrown.

Reviewer 3: In the scenario you've mentioned why would 3.14 need to be converted to int?

Author: STJ supports quoted numbers meaning numbers can be stored as string in JSON but at run-time the floating\integral values are desired.

        {
            new JsonValue(2, options),
            new JsonValue(3, options),
            new JsonValue(42, options)
        },
    }
```
so it is possible to omit the options instance for non-root members. When a property or element is added, the options instance is set to the parent's instance:
```cs
    var jObject = new JsonObject(options) // options still needed at root level
    {
        ["MyString"] = new JsonValue("Hello!"),
        ["MyBoolean"] = new JsonValue(false),
        ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray()
        {
            new JsonValue(2),
            new JsonValue(3),
            new JsonValue(42)
        },
    }
```

Pending design, it may be required that all option instances are the same across a given `JsonNode` tree.

### Using `System.Object` for values
Both `JsonObject` and `JsonArray` allow `System.Object` to be specified for the property\array values. This allows a terse and more performant model, plus compatibility with `dynamic`:
```cs
    var jObject = new JsonObject(options)
    {
        ["MyString"] = "Hello!",
        ["MyBoolean"] = false,
        ["MyArray"] = new int[] {2, 3, 42};
    }
```

> The values remain in the original form and are not converted to `JsonNode` instances:

Reviewer 3: To me, this feels unintuitive. I think these types should have consistent behavior when parsing JSON or creating a tree dynamically.

Author: You can still use 100% `JsonNode` types in "edit mode". However, the design doesn't force that because:
- We use `object` instead of `JsonNode` in `IDictionary`\`IList` for less issues with `dynamic` per https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/163/files#diff-34fc37119c1d4491b844207aeed3a9c846c3e2d835fd712e164b1e47b89687c0R358
- Consistent with Newtonsoft
- More intuitive in some cases since a literal `true` or `false` can be used (without implicit operators) instead of `JsonBoolean(true)` and `JsonBoolean(false)`.
- More performant that being forced to use `JsonNode` types (removes a somewhat unnecessary abstraction)

The disadvantage of the current design then is that the object model could be a mix of different types, which may be confusing to any code that needed to walk that object model in "edit mode". Note that after deserialization all types are `JsonNode`-derived. However, if such code that needed to walk an object model also needed to operate on CLR types in general, then this wouldn't be an issue.

Author: As noted elsewhere, `JsonNode` is now required (not `System.Object`) for array elements and object properties. The raw (or current) value for a node is exposed as `JsonNode.Value` which, for example, would be a bool, string, collection, etc. 

The Value property is mutable (has a setter) and can be set to "anything". When `JsonValue` is serialized that raw value is serialized using the existing serialization semantics (using the options to control formatting, naming policies, custom converters, etc).

  - STJ is considering removing its reference to using reflection emit, so referencing `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` would require keeping the the various System.Reflection.* references. Since reflection emit is currently implemented in the runtime (`System.Private.CoreLib`), disk savings by avoiding the API surface layer in `SREmit.ILGeneration` and `SREmit.Lightweight` is limited to ~30K.
- Existing usages of STJ such as by the SDK and Visual Studio that do not use `dynamic` also do not want to carry `System.Linq.Expressions.dll`.

The preferred approach is to ensure ILLinker can remove the dependency to `System.Linq.Expressions.dll` when `dynamic` is not needed. This is achieved by having an opt-in method `EnableDynamicTypes()` on `JsonSerializerOptions` that roots all internal usages of `System.Linq.Expressions.dll`.

## Proposed API to enable dynamic mode
All classes to be located in STJ.dll.

```cs

> namespace System.Text.Json
> {
>     public static class JsonSerializerOptions
>     {
>         // The root method that if not called, ILLinker will trim out the reference to `System.Linq.Expressions.dll`.
>         // Any System.Object-qualified type specified in a called to JsonSerializer.Deserialize() will create either a DynamicJsonArray, DynamicJsonObject or DynamicJsonValue.
>         public static void EnableDynamicTypes();
>     }
> }

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
namespace System.Text.Json
{
    public partial class JsonSerializerOptions
    {
        // The root method that if not called, ILLinker will trim out the reference to `System.Linq.Expressions.dll`.
        // Any System.Object-qualified type specified in a called to JsonSerializer.Deserialize() will create either a DynamicJsonArray, DynamicJsonObject or DynamicJsonValue.
        public void EnableDynamicTypes();
    }
}
```

```
is equivalent to
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<dynamic>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```
and these (assuming `options.EnableDynamicTypes()` was called)
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<DynamicJsonNode>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<DynamicJsonObject>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```

### Supporting non-dynamic to dynamic
If a previously created non-dynamic `JsonNode` object needs dynamic support, an helper could be provided:
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
{
    public static class JsonExtensions
    {
        public static dynamic ToDynamic(JsonNode this value);
    }
}
```

Called like this:
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // a non-dynamic JsonNode
    dynamic obj = node.ToDynamic();
```

The implementation of `ToDynamic()` is efficient since it will perform a shallow clone by copying the internal value (for `JsonValue`), array (for `JsonArray`) or dictionary (for `JsonObject`):
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // a non-dynamic JsonNode
    byte[] utf8 = node.SerializeToUtf8Bytes();
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonNode>(utf8, options);
```

# Writable DOM

> A deserialized DOM is based upon JSON token types (object, array, number, string, true, false) since the corresponding CLR types are not known, unlike deserializing against a strongly-typed POCO. This is consistent with `JsonElement` semantics as well.

Reviewer 7: I haven't gotten a chance to read through all this yet, but can you help summarize how this design relates or differs from the existing effort (which had a hierarchy of types) from: https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/blob/master/src/System.Text.Json/docs/writable_json_dom_spec.md

Are there any fundamental differences, or is it mainly small updates over what we had initially?

Do we have learnings from the usability study incorporated into this design?

Author: These are the key differences that come to mind:
- Supports C# `dynamic`. The programming model for `dynamic` is consistent with non-dynamic cases. For example, to create a new JSON object, there is a `JsonObject` base class for non-dynamic cases and a derived `JsonDynamicObject` type for when dynamic is enabled.
- Has a sealed `JsonValue` class instead of separate "JsonNumber", "JsonString" and "JsonBoolean" classes since the distinction becomes irrelevant in some cases such as when a CLR number can be deserialized from a JSON number or from a JSON string (for quoted numbers) and similarly be serialized as a JSON string or a JSON number depending on options. However, it is still possible to obtain the JSON token type for a node after deserialization.
- Supports custom and built-in serialization converters. Has a reference to the options class to make this possible. Thus it can leverage the many built-in converters (for value types, collections and objects) and any registered custom converters to do this.
  - Due to this, there is currently no explicit\implicit casts or known-type-specific conversions (e.g. no one-off method to convert to\from a `System.Double`). 
  - Instead of one-off methods for known types, a `JsonNode.Convert<T>()` method is used which may perform non-trivial conversions such as converting a `JsonValue` with an internal `byte[]` (obtained from raw UTF8 JSON) to a POCO, or converting a string (obtained from a JSON string) to a `System.Double`.

It is actively been reviewed, so the above is subject to change.

Once the API is internally approved, we should do new usability study on it and iterate the API if necessary.

```

If `System.Object` was used instead of `JsonNode`, or the indexers were not exposed on `JsonNode`, the above terse syntax wouldn't work and a more verbose syntax would be necessary:
```cs
    object jObject = new JsonObject(options)
    {
        ((JsonObject)((JsonArray)((JsonObject)jObject["Child"])["Array"])[0])["Message"] = new JsonValue("Hello!");
        ((JsonObject)((JsonArray)((JsonObject)jObject["Child"])["Array"])[1])["Message"] = new JsonValue("Hello!!");
    }
```

During serialization, the appropriate converter is used to serialize either the primitive value or the underlying value held by a `JsonNode`.

It is also possible to take a given CLR type and assign it to `Value`:
``` cs
    JsonArray jArray = ...
    jArray.Value = new int[] {0, 1}; // raw array used instead of JsonValue
    string json = jArray.Serialize();
```

## Changing the deserialization of System.Object
The serializer has always deserialized JSON that maps to a `System.Object` as a `JsonElement`. This will remain the default behavior going forward, however there will be a way to specify `JsonNode` instead:

```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
{
    public partial class JsonSerializerOptions
    {

>         public bool UseJsonNodeForUnknownTypes { get; set;}

Reviewer 8: It seems we want this to be implicitly set to true when `EnableDynamicTypes()` is called.

    int i = obj.MyProp;
    Debug.Assert(i == 42);

    string json = obj.Serialize();
```

### Varying the `T` in `Deserialize<T>`
This
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<object>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```
is equivalent to
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<dynamic>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```
and these (assuming `options.EnableDynamicTypes()` was called)
```cs
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<DynamicJsonNode>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<DynamicJsonObject>("{\"MyProp\":42}", options);
```

### Supporting non-dynamic to dynamic
If a previously created non-dynamic `JsonNode` object needs dynamic support:
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // a non-dynamic JsonNode
    dynamic obj = node.ToDynamic();
```

The implementation of `ToDynamic()` is efficient since it will perform a shallow clone by copying the internal value (for `JsonValue`), array (for `JsonArray`) or dictionary (for `JsonObject`):
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // a non-dynamic JsonNode
    byte[] utf8 = node.SerializeToUtf8Bytes();
    dynamic obj = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonNode>(utf8, options);
```

> # Writable DOM

Reviewer 7: Can you please share a code sample of how we expect to create a JSON DOM from scratch (object initialization/etc.)? That was considered an important scenario to make user-friendly as part of the first prototype.

Author: Here's one recently added sample that uses implicit operators + constructor initializers + array params:
```cs
var jObject = new JsonObject()
{
    ["MyString"] = "Hello!",
    ["MyNull"] = null,
    ["MyBoolean"] = false,
    ["MyInt"] = 43,
    ["MyDateTime"] = new DateTime(2020, 7, 8),
    ["MyGuid"] = new Guid("ed957609-cdfe-412f-88c1-02daca1b4f51"),
    ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray(2, 3, 42),
    ["MyObject"] = new JsonObject()
    {
        ["MyString"] = "Hello!!"
    },
    ["Child"] = new JsonObject()
    {
        ["ChildProp"] = 1
    }
};
```

A deserialized DOM is based upon JSON token types (object, array, number, string, true, false) since the corresponding CLR types are not known, unlike deserializing against a strongly-typed POCO. This is consistent with `JsonElement` semantics as well.

Although a deserializated DOM in "read mode" fully maps to the JSON token types, once in "edit mode", CLR values to be assigned to nodes which do not necessarily map to JSON token types. Two common examples:
- Quoted numbers. A CLR number (`Double`, `Int32`, etc) is normally serialized to JSON as a number. However, a number may be serialized as a JSON string instead - which is necessary to support CLR numbers that can't be represented in JSON as a number, such as `Double.NaN` or `Double.PositiveInfinity`.

> - String Enums. A CLR `Enum` is normally serialized to JSON as a number, but through a custom converter (including `JsonStringEnumConverter`), an `Enum` can be serialized as the string representation.

Reviewer 7: I am surprised to see support for these as first-class features within the dom. Do we have evidence that folks really want this, outside of the serializer? I consider the DOM to be the true representation of JSON and hence questions around which CLR type does each token correspond to isn't really fundamental to the object hierarchy. Converting to CLR types is more of the responsibility of the serializer and the helper functions on JsonNode/JsonElement, rather than using the converter approach.

These are more edge case uses of the DOM. We should prioritize the mainline scenario of creating, modifying, and querying the DOM over these features.

Author: It comes because we allow any CLR value (such as an Enum) to be specified in `JsonValue<T>`. Thus we need to address the mapping from CLR types to JSON.

Author: If we tighten the API to not allow any value, and thus have a predictable token type, at a minimum we likely need to add some more built-in types like Enum. For example, this works in Newtonsoft:
```cs
JToken j = new JValue(ConsoleColor.Red);
string json = j.ToString();
Debug.Assert(json == "Red");
```

Author: > We should prioritize the mainline scenario of creating, modifying, and querying the DOM over these features.

What DOM querying features are you thinking or referring to (other than IEnumerable support on JsonArray\JsonObject)?

For example, consider this **hypothetical API** that has a `JsonNumber` class (and not the proposal of using just `JsonNode`)
```cs
// Ask for a number with a JSON number token type.
// Internally probably stored as a byte[] or JsonElement.
JsonNumber number = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonNumber>("1.2");
double dlb = number.GetValue<double>();

// Change to "NaN".
number.Value = double.Nan;
string json = number.Serialize();
Debug.Assert(json == "\"NaN\""); // Due to quoted number support, this works.

// However what about round-tripping?
// Can a JSON string be deserialized into a JsonNumber? If so, "JsonNumber" no longer means a "JSON number".
// When deserializing a string there is no known CLR type, so the internal value would need be based on a string\byte[].
// So a "JsonString" node would normally be created, not "JsonNumber" and thus throw here:
number = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<JsonNumber>(json); // Throws

// Even if the above could be made to work, it wouldn't work with a JsonObject node.
// A JsonObject would create "JsonString" nodes for "NaN" JSON strings since it has
// no way of knowing these should map to a JsonNumber (or a CLR number).
```

> Thus the DOM is based on CLR types (not JSON tokens) in edit mode and during serialization. The JSON "value" types (number, string, boolean) are represented as a common `JsonValue` sealed class, and **not** separate `JsonNumber`, `JsonString` and `JsonBoolean` classes as shown in the example above.

Reviewer 7: We should revisit this design choice. Are there substantial customer benefits of treating the DOM as CLR types (which we can't solve in other ways), that is worth potentially subverting user expectations?

If we really want to support string to number conversion, another way to do so would be via an specific options on the parse/ctor of the JsonNode/JsonNumber types.

During serialization, the DOM is written using the serializer and uses any custom converters that may be configured. In all but idiocentric scenarios (e.g. a custom converter can do anything), the behavior is natural and JSON is round-tripped as expected.

In the example, a JSON "NaN" string is deserialized into a `JsonValue` and when `GetValue<double>` is called, a `double` is returned, assuming the appropriate `JsonSerializerOptions` are configured for quoted numbers. When the node is serialized, it produces a JSON string (again, if configured). The consumer of the DOM is not necessarily aware that `double` values assigned to the node may be serialized to JSON as either a string or a JSON number, and after deserialization is not aware what the internal state is - it could be a `byte[]`, a `JsonElement` or a `string` depending on implementation and\or the JSON token (string or number).

## Primary API
All types live in STJ.dll.
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
// Also consider existing S.T.J.Serialization namespace instead of S.T.J.

> // since it is now coupled to the serializer rather than stand-alone.

Reviewer 7: To me, this doesn't follow the principle of least surprise. I would not have expected the JsonNode/DOM types to have strong coupling with the serializer at all. We should consider keeping the writable dom at the STJ namespace next to JsonDocument and JsonElement.

Author: Due to recent additions to interop with `JsonElement` the design now assumes a "System.Text.Json.Node" namespace.

{

>     public abstract class JsonNode

Reviewer 7: What does interaction between JsonNode types and JsonElement look like? Can I go from a writable DOM to a read-only one and vice versa?

Author: Currently it's the same as what existed in the V5 prototype. I added more detail to the design.

    {
        internal JsonNode(); // prevent external derived classes.
        public JsonNode(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

>         public JsonSerializerOptions Options { get; }

Reviewer 7: Given we have `JsonDocument` and `JsonDocumentOptions`, its odd to see the use of `JsonSerializerOptions` here. Why is this required? Can we avoid the tight coupling, and for anyone wanting to serialize a writable dom into a C# POCO type, I would expect a JsonSerializer overload that accepts it, identical to these: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/31274

This fits the layering mental model a bit more.

Author: Supporting the `JsonSerializerOptions` is covered in the design to interop with various features including:
- `Converters.Add()` (custom converters added at run-time)
- `NumberHandling`
- `DefaultIgnoreCondition` (default\null handling )
- `PropertyNamingPolicy`.  Note that `DictionaryKeyPolicy` is not used since an object and a dictionary both have the same JSON representation.
- `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive`
- `AllowTrailingCommas`
- `ReadCommentHandling`. Note that round-tripping comments are not possible. See the "Features not proposed in first round" section.
- `MaxDepth`

`JsonDocument` \ `JsonElement` are not required for the writable DOM. We could still add those `JsonSerializer.Serialize`\`Deserialize` overloads to the serializer, however, independently.

        // Support terse syntax for JsonArray (no cast necessary to JsonArray).
        public System.Text.Json.Serialization.JsonNode? this[int index] { get; set; }

        // Support terse syntax for JsonObject (no cast necessary to JsonObject).

>         public virtual System.Text.Json.Serialization.JsonNode? this[string key] { get; set; }

Reviewer 7: Why is the string-based indexer virtual, but not the integer based one?

        // Return the internal value or convert to T as necessary.
        public abstract T GetValue<T>();
        public abstract object GetValue<Type type>();
        public abstract bool TryGetValue<T>(out T? value);
        public abstract bool TryGetValue(Type type, out object? value);

        // Convert a non-dynamic node to a dynamic.
        public object ToDynamic();
        // This would also work assume the linker will remove the reference to SLE if not called:
        // public dynamic ToDynamic();

        // The token type from deserialization; otherwise JsonValueKind.Unspecified.
        public JsonValueKind ValueKind { get; }

        // Serialize() wrappers which pass the value and options.
        // These are helpers and thus can be considered an optional API feature.
        // There are no wrappers for JsonSerializer.Deserialize* methods since the
        // existing Deserialize* methods can be called.
        public string Serialize();
        public void Serialize(System.Text.Json.Utf8JsonWriter writer);
        public System.Threading.Tasks.Task SerializeAsync(Stream utf8Json, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default);

>         public byte[] SerializeToUtf8Bytes();

Reviewer 7: Given the existing JSON stack and set of APIs, the interop between the serialize and JsonNode, JsonElement, JsonDocument should be on the high-level JsonSerializer type itself. We should avoid sprinkling APIs using the `Serialize` verb on other types like this. Is there a substantial benefit of this approach?

Author: I agree that there we too many; originally I had no "helper" Parse\Serialize methods and there were some questions on usability of not having "Parse" methods for discoverability, so those were added. However, since then I did remove the Async and Utf8 overloads.

    }

    public sealed class JsonArray : JsonNode, IList<object>
    {
        public JsonArray(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        // Can be used to return:
        // - Any compatible collection type
        // - JsonElement
        // - string or byte[] (as JSON)
        public override T GetValue<T>();
        public override object GetValue<Type type>();
        public override bool TryGetValue<T>(out T? value);
        public override bool TryGetValue(Type type, out object? value);
    }

    public sealed class JsonObject : JsonNode, IDictionary<string, object>
    {
        public JsonObject(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        // Can be used to return:
        // - Any compatible dictionary type
        // - POCO including anonymous type or record
        // - JsonElement
        // - string or byte[] (as JSON)
        public override T GetValue<T>();
        public override object GetValue<Type type>();
        public override bool TryGetValue<T>(out T? value);
        public override bool TryGetValue(Type type, out object? value);
    }

>     public sealed class JsonValue : JsonNode

Reviewer 7: If this type existed in isolation, I can see a case to be made for it, but I suspect given the pervasive use of the union type JsonElement, having another very similar concept which represents a list of JSON values, would cause user confusion.
That was one of the benefits of keeping explicit JsonString, JsonNumber, JsonNull and JsonBoolean types from the initial prototype.

Although the serializer can be used to directly (de)serialize `JsonNode` types, once a `JsonNode` instance is created, it is expected the `JsonNode.GetValue<T>()` method is used to change types instead of using the serializer:
```cs
    JsonNode node = ... // any value
    string str;

    // This works, but has no caching:
    byte[] utf8 = node.SerializeToUtf8Bytes();
    str = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<string>(utf8, options);

    // For ease-of-use and performance, use GetValue().
    // It may return the raw internal value or the last converted value instead of deserializing.
    str = node.GetValue<string>();
```

### Cast operators
No explicit or implicit cast operators exist since `GetValue<T>` allows for a single, consistent programming model. This also works on not just the "known" types in the CLR but also custom data types known by the serializer.

Cast operators do not work in all languages such as F# and even for C# would not work for all types:
```cs
JsonArray jArray = ...
jArray[0] = "hello"; // Possible though a string implicit operator.

> jArray[1] = myCustomDataType; // We can't know all types, so this won't work.

Reviewer 7: There seems to be some magic happening here. Do we really need to support this? I am guessing some hidden serialization is happening under the covers? Maybe let the user write the few methods calls explicitly, themselves.

Author: None of the cast operators are required. The `JsonValue<T>` constructor can always be used to create a value, and the `value.GetValue<T>()` method can be used to obtain the value.

Assuming we want an implicit cast operator to initialize a value (safely), then I think an explicit cast operator makes sense for obtaining the value (not so safe; may throw).

        ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray(options)
        {
            new JsonValue(2, options),
            new JsonValue(3, options),
            new JsonValue(42, options)
        },
    }
```
so it is possible to omit the options instance for non-root members. When a property or element is added, the options instance is set to the parent's instance:
```cs
    var jObject = new JsonObject(options) // options still needed at root level
    {
        ["MyString"] = new JsonValue("Hello!"),
        ["MyBoolean"] = new JsonValue(false),
        ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray()
        {
            new JsonValue(2),
            new JsonValue(3),
            new JsonValue(42)
        },
    }
```

It is required that all option instances are the same across a given `JsonNode` tree.

### Using `System.Object` for values
`JsonNode` has indexers that allow `JsonObject` properties and `JsonArray` elements to be specified. This allows a terse and more performant mode:
```cs
    var jObject = new JsonObject(options)
    {
        ["Child"]["Array"][0]["Message"] = new JsonValue("Hello!");
        ["Child"]["Array"][1]["Message"] = new JsonValue("Hello!!");

>     }

Reviewer 7: Is this type of unchecked chaining representative of real-world code samples? Making it terse by avoiding the need for too much explicit casts is good, but I am not sure if folks actually navigate the DOM in his hard-coded fashion. What happens if the array doesn't have 2 elements?
What would happen if I did something like:
`["Child"]["Array"][25] = 5`

Also, when it comes to JSON DOM creation from scratch, what about this:
```C#
var jObject = new JsonObject
{
    {
        "Child", new JsonArray()
        {
            { "Message", "Hello!" },
            { "Message", "Hello!!" },
        }
    }
};
```

Author: It will throw `ArgumentOutOfRangeException` in that case. The same if `dynamic` is used. This is also consistent with Newtonsoft and requests by the Azure team to support a terse syntax.

During serialization, the DOM is written using the serializer and uses any custom converters that may be configured. In all but idiocentric scenarios (e.g. a custom converter can do anything), the behavior is natural and JSON is round-tripped as expected.

In the example, a JSON "NaN" string is deserialized into a `JsonValue` and when `GetValue<double>` is called, a `double` is returned, assuming the appropriate `JsonSerializerOptions` are configured for quoted numbers. When the node is serialized, it produces a JSON string (again, if configured). The consumer of the DOM is not necessarily aware that `double` values assigned to the node may be serialized to JSON as either a string or a JSON number, and after deserialization is not aware what the internal state is - it could be a `byte[]`, a `JsonElement` or a `string` depending on implementation and\or the JSON token (string or number).

## Primary API
All types live in STJ.dll.
```cs
namespace System.Text.Json
// Also consider existing S.T.J.Serialization namespace instead of S.T.J.
// since it is now coupled to the serializer rather than stand-alone.
{
    public abstract class JsonNode

>     {

Author: When using dynamic, this will work fine.

When not using dynamic, yes the current design is a bit rigid although is not that bad in "edit mode" since it does allow standard CLR types to be used and not forcing JsonNode-derived types. However, based on feedback I think we're leaning to a more loosely typed model -- the JsonDocument\JsonElement model today is very rigid, and I don't think we want the full set of "correctness" here.

>     {

Author: The design was recently updated to assume JsonNode-based indexers for JsonArray and JsonObject.

>         public JsonNode(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

Author: Yes this should be internal. Thanks

    }

    public sealed class JsonObject : JsonNode, IDictionary<string, object>
    {
        public JsonObject(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);
        public JsonObject(JsonElement value, JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        // Can be used to return:
        // - Any compatible dictionary type
        // - POCO including anonymous type or record
        // - JsonElement
        // - string or byte[] (as JSON)
        public override T GetValue<T>();
        public override object GetValue<Type type>();
        public override bool TryGetValue<T>(out T? value);
        public override bool TryGetValue(Type type, out object? value);
    }

    public sealed class JsonValue : JsonNode
    {
        public JsonValue(JsonSerializerOptions options = null);
        public JsonValue(JsonElement value, JsonSerializerOptions options = null);
        public JsonValue(object value, JsonSerializerOptions options = null);

        // The internal raw value.
        // During deserialization, this will be a JsonElement (pending design) since it supports
        // delayed creation of string and on-demand creation of numbers.
        // In edit mode, can be set to any object.

>         public object Value {get; set;}

Author: Note that the generic versions below won't box; not sure on why we wouldn't want `object` here since we want to allow any CLR value to be assigned.

>         public object Value {get; set;}

Author: With the current design, not sure how this could not be `object`. i.e. if `JsonNode` then we wouldn't be able to assign any CLR object, unless the other design used generics for the internal value?

>         public object Value {get; set;}

Reviewer 7: I agree, we should avoid such hidden boxing for primitive JSON value tokens.

        public bool TryGetDateTime(out System.DateTime value);
        public bool TryGetDateTimeOffset(out System.DateTimeOffset value);
        public bool TryGetDecimal(out decimal value);
        public bool TryGetDouble(out double value);
        public bool TryGetGuid(out System.Guid value);
        public bool TryGetInt16(out short value);
        public bool TryGetInt32(out int value);
        public bool TryGetInt64(out long value);
        public bool TryGetSByte(out sbyte value);
        public bool TryGetSingle(out float value);
        public bool TryGetUInt16(out ushort value);
        public bool TryGetUInt32(out uint value);
        public bool TryGetUInt64(out ulong value);
    }
}
```

## Serializer interop
Unlike the 5.0 `JsonNode` prototype and the existing `JsonDocument`, the `JsonNode` types are intended to be used by the serializer directly and do not contain `Parse()` or `Write()` methods themselves because:
- The existing serializer methods can be used which support UTF8, string, Utf8JsonReader\Writer and Stream. Any future overloads will just work.
- Serializer-specific functionality including custom converters and quoted numbers just work.

> The `JsonSerializerOptions` is passed to `JsonNode` and used to specify any run-time added custom converters, handle other options such as quoted numbers, and to respect the `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive` to determine whether the string-based lookup of property names on `JsonObject` are case-sensitive (for both direct use of `JsonObject` and also indirect use through `dynamic`). If we have `static JsonValue Parse()` methods, those would also need an override to specify the `JsonSerializerOptions`.

Author: The custom converters hang off of the options, which allow conversion to any compatible type (enums, string-based numbers, etc).

> The `JsonSerializerOptions` is passed to `JsonNode` and used to specify any run-time added custom converters, handle other options such as quoted numbers, and to respect the `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive` to determine whether the string-based lookup of property names on `JsonObject` are case-sensitive (for both direct use of `JsonObject` and also indirect use through `dynamic`). If we have `static JsonValue Parse()` methods, those would also need an override to specify the `JsonSerializerOptions`.

Reviewer 7: Another example for using `JsonNodeOptions` is duplicate property name handling:
https://github.com/ahsonkhan/corefx/blob/5bc2806f33090e78b38fafe4d5b46d5a0a4c1f08/src/System.Text.Json/ref/System.Text.Json.cs#L270

```cs
JsonArray jArray = ...
jArray[2] = "hello";
// Is jArray[2] a string or a JsonValue?

jArray[2] = 2;
// jArray[2] is always an int since we can't have implicit cast operators for number types.
```

Although it is possible to add cast operators for `JsonValue` to\from string\bool, number types should not have any implicit operator since they may throw - for example, an internal value of "3.14" cannot be converted into `int` so an exception must be thrown.

### Specifying the `JsonSerializerOptions` instance
The `JsonSerializerOptions` instance needs to be specified in order for any run-time added custom converters to be found and to use `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive` for property lookup with `JsonObject`.

It is cumbersome and error-prone to specify the options instance for every new element or property:
```cs
    var jObject = new JsonObject(options)
    {
        ["MyString"] = new JsonValue("Hello!", options),
        ["MyBoolean"] = new JsonValue(false, options),
        ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray(options)
        {
            new JsonValue(2, options),
            new JsonValue(3, options),
            new JsonValue(42, options)
        },
    }
```

> so it is possible to omit the options instance for non-root members. When a property or element is added, the options instance is set to the parent's instance:

Reviewer 6: How would this technically work? Do JsonToken instances have a reference to their parent? If so, what happens when a JsonObject instance is added as the child of two different parents?

In Newtonsoft.Json the `JToken.Parent` property works because adding a token that already has a parent to a different parent will clone it.

Debug.Assert(jsonElement.GetProperty("text").GetStringValue() == "new value");

// Serialization of modified values is also supported.
jsonElement.WriteTo(writer);
```

To obtain a node from an element, use the node constructors:
```cs
JsonElement jsonElement = ...
var jValue = new JsonValue<JsonElement>(jsonElement);
var jObject = new JsonObject(jsonElement);
var jArray = new JsonArray(jsonElement);
```

# Programming model notes
## Why `JsonValue` and not `JsonNumber` + `JsonString` + `JsonBoolean`?
The JSON primitives (number, string, true, false) do **not** have their own `JsonNode`-derived type like `JsonNumber`, `JsonString` and `JsonBoolean`. Instead, a common `JsonValue` class represents them. This allows a JSON number, for example, to serialize and deserialize as either a CLR `String` or a `Double` depending on usage and options.

## Cast operators for JsonValue<T>
Although explicit or implicit cast operators are not required for functionality, based on usability feedback requesting a terse syntax, the use of both explicit cast operators (from a `JsonValue<T>` to known primitives) and implicit cast operators (from known primitives to a `JsonValue<T>`) are supported.

> Note that cast operators do not work in all languages such as F#.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Note that implicit conversions do not work in all languages such as F#.
```

Author: Thanks. Updated

```
with dynamic:
```cs
JsonArray jArray = ...
jArray[0] = "hello"; // Uses implicit operator.
jArray[1] = myCustomDataType; // Possible through dynamic.

string s = jArray[0]; // Possible through dynamic.
MyCustomDataType m = jArray[1]; // Possible through dynamic.
```

## Specifying the `JsonSerializerOptions` instance
The `JsonSerializerOptions` instance needs to be specified in order for any run-time added custom converters to be found, to support `PropertyNameCaseInsensitive` for property lookup, and other options such as `NumberHandling`.

It is cumbersome and error-prone to specify the options instance for every new element or property. Consider the verbose syntax:
```cs
// Verbose syntax (not recommended, but still possible in the API)
var jObject = new JsonObject(options)
{
    ["MyString"] = new JsonValue<string>("Hello!", options),
    ["MyBoolean"] = new JsonValue<bool>(false, options),
    ["MyArray"] = new JsonArray(options)
    {
        new JsonValue(2, options),
        new JsonValue(3, options),
        new JsonValue(42, options)
    },
}
```

> and the terse syntax which omits the options instance for non-root members. When a property or element is added, the options instance is set to the parent's instance:

Reviewer 9: Wouldn't that lead to confusion if the same node instance is assigned to trees with different configs? It doesn't seem too unlikely to me (e.g. when some application caches a `JsonValue` in a static).

Author: Per offline discussion, to support caching or related scenarios where multiple options are used, I added additional clarity in that section that allows different option instances to be specified within a tree, but during a given serialization, only the options from the node passed to serialize()\ToJsonString()\etc is used.

In addition to deferring the creation of numbers in this manner, the other node types are also deferred including strings. In addition, `JsonObject` and `JsonArray` instances are not populated with child nodes until traversed. Using `JsonElement` in this way along with defferred creation of values and child nodes greatly improves CPU performance and reduces allocations especially when a subset of a graph is used.

Simple deserialization example:
```cs
JsonObject jObject = JsonObject.Parse("{""MyProperty"":42}");
JsonValue jValue = jObject["MyProperty"];

// Verify the contents
Debug.Assert(jValue is JsonValue<JsonElement>); // On deserialize, the value is JsonElement
int i = jValue.GetValue<int>(); // Same programming model as the sample below.
Debug.Assert(i == 42);
```

To mutate the value, a new node instance must be created:
```cs
jObject["MyProperty"] = 43;

// Verify the contents
JsonValue jValue = jObject["MyProperty"];
Debug.Assert(jValue is JsonValue<int>);
int i = jValue.GetValue<int>(); // Same programming model as the sample above.

> Debug.Assert(i == 42);

Reviewer 10: nit: 43
